# EP-11584: Global Policy Attachment using targetSelectors


* Issue: [#11584](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/11584)


## Background

Currently, resources (such as `HTTPRoutes`) can only attach to targeting policies defined in the same namespace. This requirement can be limiting in scenarios where policies need to be attachable across multiple application namespace.

## Motivation

Provide the ability to:
1. Define policies that are meant to be applicable to multiple namespaces to be defined in a single well known namespace.
1. Use `targetSelectors` to attach such policies to arbitrary resources defined in any namespace.
1. Allow resources (such as `HTTPRoutes`) to attach to such policies defined in the well known namespace using labels, enabling a more centralized policy management approach.

## Goals

- Preserve same-namespace policy attachment as the default behavior.
- Enable cross-namespace global policy attachment using `KGW_GLOBAL_POLICY_NAMESPACE` environment variable.

## Non-Goals

- Cross-namespace policy attachment with `targetRefs`.

## Implementation Details

### Feature Enablement

This feature is disabled by default and can be enabled by setting the `KGW_GLOBAL_POLICY_NAMESPACE` environment variable to the namespace where global policies reside.

### Example Behavior

When the feature is enabled with `KGW_GLOBAL_POLICY_NAMESPACE=kgateway-system`, the [configuration](/internal/kgateway/translator/gateway/testutils/inputs/traffic-policy/label_based.yaml) enables the `HTTPRoute` `example-route` in the `infra` namespace to attach to the `TrafficPolicy` `global-policy` in the `kgateway-system` namespace.

### Test Plan

Translator and e2e tests are added to ensure cross-namespace policy attachment works with a global policy namespace.

## Alternatives

### 1. Implicitly enable cross-namespace policy attachment
- **Pros**: Simpler UX.
- **Cons**: Performance degradation at scale.

### 2. Add namespace to targetSelectors
- **Pros**: Targeting namespace is explicit.
- **Cons**: Violates standard policy attachment API, performance degradation at scale.

## Open Questions

n/a
