# EP-11741: Policy Status and merge reporting


* Issue: [#11741](https://github.com/kgateway-dev/kgateway/issues/11741)


## Background

Kgateway policy CRs make use of the `gwv1alpha2.PolicyStatus` API for statuses. Currently, this API is limited as it does not disambiguate policy acceptance and attachment. Policy attachment is complex because it involves applying policies by priority, or merging prioritized policies, which can result in some or all fields in a lower priority policy being overridden in the final policy attached to the targeted resource. This can lead to confusion when a policy is accepted but not attached due to conflicts with other policies.

## Motivation

Enhance the status API to make use of custom Conditions to report policy acceptance and attachment separately. This will provide clearer insights into the state of policies, especially in cases where a policy is accepted but not attached due to conflicts.

## Goals

- Report policy acceptance and attachment separately using custom Conditions.
- Summarize attachment information using the `Attached` Condition.
- Add `MergeOrigins` as metadata on the output Envoy config.

## Non-Goals

- Surfacing fine grained or high cardinality data that is not representable in the status API.
- Report status for unresolved `targetRefs` on the policy CR.

## Implementation Details

Refer to the [status condition types and reasons](/api/v1alpha1/policy_types.go) for the new Conditions and Reasons that will be used to report policy acceptance and attachment.

The existing Policy reporter framework will be extended to track the policy attachment state per policy as an aggregate for all its targets. When building the final policy status, the `Attached` Condition will report the following:
`
- `status: "True", reason: Attached`: if the policy is attached to all its targets without merging with other policies.
- `status: "True", reason: Merged`: if the policy is attached to all its targets but merged with other policies for one or more tagets.
- `status: "False", reason: Overridden`: if the policy was overridden for one or more targets during a merge.

Since a policy can be attached to multiple targets and have different attachment states for each target, a policy can be in more than one state at the same time, such as being `Attached`, `Merged`, or `Overridden` for different targets. The `Attached` Condition gives precedence to the most severe state, i.e., `Overridden` > `Merged` > `Attached`, if the policy has multiple associated states.

Additionally, `MergeOrigins` will be included as metadata on the corresponding output Envoy config for diagnostic purposes. In the future, tooling could make use of this metadata to provide insights into the policy merging outcome.

### Examples

When a policy successfully attached to all its targets:
```
status:
  ancestors:
  - ancestorRef:
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: test
      namespace: default
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Policy accepted
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Valid
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Attached to all targets
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Attached
      status: "True"
      type: Attached
    controllerName: kgateway.dev/kgateway
```

When a policy merges with other policies but is still attached partially:
```
status:
  ancestors:
  - ancestorRef:
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: test
      namespace: default
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Policy accepted
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Valid
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Merged with other policies in target(s) and attached
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Merged
      status: "True"
      type: Attached
    controllerName: kgateway.dev/kgateway
```

When a policy is accepted but not attached:
```
status:
  ancestors:
  - ancestorRef:
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
      kind: Gateway
      name: test
      namespace: default
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Policy accepted
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Valid
      status: "True"
      type: Accepted
    - lastTransitionTime: "2025-07-24T18:06:29Z"
      message: Overridden due to conflict with higher priority policy in target(s)
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: Overridden
      status: "False"
      type: Attached
    controllerName: kgateway.dev/kgateway
```

### Test Plan

Unit, translator, and e2e tests to verify the policy Status API.

## Open Questions

n/a
